vb-ide.txt

The Visual Basic (VB) Interactive Development Environment (IDE)

VB applications are usually written and debugged in the VB IDE.  The
IDE appears when you start Visual Basic.  It is the large window (the
VB window) whose title bar says "Microsoft Visual Basic" (among other
things).

The IDE is usually configured to show a single large window (the VB
window) with several other windows inside it.  In this configuration
the VB window and its contents can be dragged around or minimized as a
unit.  Like most aspects of the IDE, this behavior can be
configured from the IDE itself (Tools>Options>Advanced). The usual
one-big-window configuration is called MDI (multiple document
interface) style.  In SDI (single document interface) style each
of the content windows can be moved around independently.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

VB window 

Title bar
 At top of VB window
 Project name and mode (design,run,break)

Menu bar
 Below title bar
 File Edit View etc.
 Left click menu name on menu bar to show menu
 Left click menu entry to select operation
 Left click anywhere outside menu to make menu disappear
 Menu path notation used here and in many books:
  "File>Save Project As..."  means left click "File" on menu bar, 
  then left click "Save Project As..." on File menu
 
 Potentially confusing menu behavior:
 Click on menu name has no effect when a VB dialog box is active
 Right click on menu name brings up a *different* menu which you generally don't want

Menu entries (from menu bar)
 Grayed-out ("shadow") indicates operation is not enabled at this time
 Little arrow on right edge means resting cursor on entry will pop up a cascaded menu
 Three dots ("Save Project As...") indicates selection will pop up a dialog box
 
Toolbar
 Below menu bar
 Row of icons (little pictures): open folder, floppy disk etc.
 Icons are shortcuts for menu paths: open folder icon is shortcut for File>Open Project
 Place cursor over icon for a moment to see spelled-out name of operation  
 Left-click icon to perform operation

---------------------------

Projects

A VB project is a collection of files that contains the source code
and other configuration information for a VB program.  

You usually create and maintain the files in a project by using the
IDE.  Project operations are scattered around the IDE in several
different menus, toolbar icons, dialog boxes and windows.

Each project has one .vbp (Visual Basic Project) file, whose name is the 
project name (for example MonteCarlo.vbp). The .vbp file ...


 Start new project: at VB startup, File>New Project, toolbar tilted window icon
 
The Project window 

Naming the project: Project > <ProjectName> Properties ... then fill in Project Name

Quite a few project-related operations are on the File menu

 Save the project: File>Save Project, File>Save Project As..., toolbar floppy disk icon
  "Save Project As..." allows you to name/rename project, save in a different directory
   Warning: usually Save Project *only* saves the .vbp file, *not* the other files.

 Save forms, modules: File>Save Form1.frm, File>Save Form1.frm As...
   Warning: you must usually save the files *before* you save the project
   The file menu *only* shows 

 Restore the project: At VB startup, File>Open Project, toolbar open folder icon
  Open project dialog box 

The only .frm, .bas file that appears on the File menu is the
currently selected one "on top"

All the files in a project are just ordinary text files so they can be
examined and manipulated by the usual Windows utilities (Explorer or
the DOS command prompt): you can list them, rename, move or copy them.
You can use Notepad or any other text editor to view their contents or
(if you dare) change them.  If you know what you are doing this can be
quicker than using the IDE.

----------------

Properties window

Once the focus is in the properties window, can use keyboard shortcuts:
 PgUp, PgDn, Home, End work as expected
 up arrow but also left arrow move up one entry
 down, right arrow move down one entry
 Tab moves focus from property name to property value.  With focus on value:
  Text fields (Name, Caption) edited as expected: Del clears value etc.
  Menu fields (Alignment etc.) arrow keys cycle through selections
  Enter assigns currently displayed propery value and returns focus to property name
 

----------------

Editing code

Editor works like Notepad, but also:

Set font and font size in Tools > Options > Editor Format

Cursor movement
 Ctrl-Up Arrow, Ctrl-Down arrow move to next subroutine
 (in Notepad Ctrl-Up,-Down have no effect)

Command completion
 Space inserts selected completion and puts cursor after

Case is not significant.  The IDE automatically sets VB keywords in
bicapitalized form right after you type them: ElseIf etc.

Selecting a block of text then pressing Tab automatically indents the text

Tools > Options > Editor Require Variable Declaration  (but this didn't seem to work)

------------------------------

Other sources

Gary Beene's VB information center VB tutorial http://www.vbinformation.com/tutor.htm








