windows.txt

A Newcomer's Introduction to Windows

This is a quick tutorial on using the Microsoft Windows operating
system.  It assumes no prior Windows experience and should be
suitable for computer novices.  It is also for people who have already
used a Windows PC but have avoided learning the details, and Unix and
Macintosh users who have to get some work done on a Windows PC.  

There is much about Windows that is not obvious.  It is fairly easy to
get started pointing and clicking, but to use Windows effectively you
need to know the information provided here.

Not everyone uses Windows and it is now common to exchange email and
files with them.  Windows can make this difficult because many of its
files appear as gibberish anywhere else.  This tutorial explains how
to make sure your work will be usable on other operating systems.

Basic Concepts and Vocabulary

A file is a piece of permanent storage in a computer.  Data files
contain information such as documents or pictures.  Program files
contain instructions for the computer.  You activate (run or execute)
a program to make the computer do something.

An operating system is a collection of programs used to manage files
and run programs. You cannot use a computer until it has an operating
system installed on it.  The most essential operating system programs
run when you turn on (boot) the computer.  

An operating system must provide some way for you to tell the computer
what you want to do.  Most modern operating systems provide a
graphical user interface (GUI) where you use a pointing device
(usually a mouse, sometimes a trackball) to position a pointer
(cursor) on a display (desktop) that shows pictures (icons), panels
(windows), and lists of commands (menus).  Most operating systems also
provide an alternative to the GUI called the command line, so you can
type commands at the keyboard.

A PC is a computer that contains an X86 or Pentium compatible
microprocessor (usually from Intel, but also from AMD, Cyrix or other
manufacturers) or an Alpha microprocessor (from Compaq, formerly
Digital).  The first PCs were built by IBM, now they are available
from many manufactures.  Windows is the most popular operating system
for PCs.  Windows usually comes already installed on a PC when it is
purchased.  There are other PC operating systems, for example Linux
(based on Unix, long popular with scientists and engineers).  Not all
personal computers are PCs; Macintosh computers are not PCs and do not
run Windows (they are based on the 68XXX or Power PC microprocessors from 
Motorola and run the MacOS operating system).

An application program ...


Windows versions

Several different Microsoft operating systems have been named Windows.
This tutorial covers features common to Windows 98, Windows 95,
Windows NT and Windows 2000.

Windows 98 and its predecessor Windows 95 are the most common PC
operating systems.  Windows 98 is not much different from Windows 95,
and many Windows 95 users see no reason to bother installing the newer
product.  Almost anything you find in the Windows 95 how-to books
applies as well to Windows 98, although the reverse might not always
be true.  Windows 95 was hugely different from its predecessor Windows
3.1, which is now obsolete and has mostly disappeared.  Windows 98, 95
and 3.1 are all descendents of the original (1981) PC operating
system, called MS-DOS or just DOS.  There are traces of DOS all over
Windows 98.

Windows NT is a different product line which is usually found in
corporations, universities, and other institutions that maintain large
installations of networked computers.  Windows NT has a different
ancestry (it is not based on DOS) but Microsoft has tried to make it
appear similar to Windows 95 and 98 to the typical user.  Much of the
Windows 95/98 how-to literature (including this essay) applies to
Windows NT as well.  However NT appears quite different to the system
administrator.  Windows 2000 is the latest version.  Windows NT 4.0
was the version before that; it was current for several years and will
probably survive for quite a while.

Files

Files are the basic units of permanent storage in a computer.  If you
want something to persist after you turn the power off you have to
save it in a file.  Both programs and data are files: a web page is a
file, and so is the web browser; a Word document is a file, and so is
the Word program itself.

File names

Files are identified by name.  The name usually consists of the name
proper, a dot, and the extension (also called the file type):
index.html, explorer.exe, script.doc.  The extension indicates the
purpose or role of the file: for example an .html file is a web page,
.exe is a program and .doc is a document created with the Word or
WordPad programs.  There are dozens of standard extensions like these.
Windows programs use the extension to determine how to process the
file.  Often the extension is created automatically by the program
that creates the file.  If you change the extension or assign the
wrong one, programs may not be able to recognize the file or process
it properly.

File Names can contain letters, numbers and most punctuation marks.
They can even contain spaces, as in Formal Announcement.html.  A few
punctuation marks cannot appear in file names because they have special
uses (described below): the asterisk * and the question mark ?  are
used as wildcards in searches, slashes / and \ are used in directory
paths, and the arrows < > and vertical bar | are used in DOS command
lines.

To make sure your file names will be intelligible to other operating
systems, limit them to letters, numbers, the hyphen - and the
underscore _.  In particular, spaces in file names can cause all kinds
of problems; use hyphens or underscores instead.

Windows file names are case-insensitive (it doesn't matter whether you
use upper or lower case letters): explorer.exe, EXPLORER.EXE and
Explorer.exe are the same name and all indicate the same file.
However you can type file names with mixed upper- and lowercase
letters and usually Windows will display them that way.  This can be
confusing because it appears Windows file names are case-sensitive,
but in fact they are not.  File names in some other operating systems
are case sensitive.  You need to be aware of this if you move files
across systems: SAMPLE.TXT and sample.txt are two different files in Unix,
but if you try to copy both to a Windows system you will only get one.

Before Windows 95 (in DOS and Windows 3.1) file names were limited to
eight characters and extensions to three characters.  Many file names
still have the old DOS 8+3 format; web pages on Windows systems (but
nowhere else) often have the extension .htm, not .html.  To provide
backward compatibility (to enable old programs to use new files)
Windows always generates and recognizes a unique alternate name in DOS
format: Formal Announcement.html becomes FORMAL~1.HTM.  Usually you do
not need to be aware of this.

Folders

A typical Windows PC stores thousands of files.  To make this
manageable, Windows provides a special kind of file called a folder
(also called a directory). ... folder can also contain other folders,
which can contain more files and folders, and so on.

Disks
 Names: A: C: etc.


Text files
 What are they
 Compare appearance of *.txt to *.doc
 One of the few kinds of files that are portable to non-Windows systems.  
  e.g. web pages must be processed by non-MS browsers.
 WordPad Save As ... Save as type: Text Document
